@node The head-on sample
@chapter The head-on sample

This chapter present the OpenInput equivalent to the Hello World
program.

@menu
* Hello OpenInput::                     The hello OpenInput world program
* Dissection of Hello OpenInput::       A forensic analysis of the program
* Makefile include and library paths::  Makefile help for applications that use OpenInput
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Hello OpenInput
@section Hello OpenInput

The most trivial usage of OpenInput looks like this:

@example
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
#include "openinput.h"

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
@{
    // Placeholder for the event
    oi_event ev;

    // Initialise
    oi_init("c:0 s:0 w:0", OI_FLAG_NOWINDOW);

    // Wait for an event
    oi_events_wait(&ev);

    // Print something to the screen
    printf("Hello OpenInput event!\n");
@}
@end example

This example won't actually perform anything useful except it will
initialise OpenInput, and wait forever until an event is received.  To
inject an event, you will probably have to press @code{CTRL+C} or send
a signal (using @code{kill}) to the process before you actually
receive an event. Why this is so in the above will be explained below,
where we'll dissect the program bit by bit.

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Dissection of Hello OpenInput
@section Dissection of Hello OpenInput

The very first part of the program starts like any other C program:

@example
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
#include "openinput.h"

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
@end example

These are the include-files and the standard ANSI ``main'' function.
The only special thing here is the single OpenInput include-file,
namely @code{#include "openinput.h"}.

@example
    // Placeholder for the event
    oi_event ev;
@end example

In this part, we declare the variable @code{ev} with the type
@code{oi_event}. If you consulted the header-files for OpenInput you
would see that the @code{oi_event} is a ``union'' type, that combine
all other OpenInput event types. In this way, you are able to quickly
``convert'' the type from the generic union into the specific
OpenInput event type.

@example
    // Initialise
    oi_init("c:0 s:0 w:0", OI_FLAG_NOWINDOW);
@end example

Here the actual initialisation of OpenInput is carried out. The
function takes two parameters: The first is a string describing what
window to hook into, and the other parameter consists of the OR'ed
flags that modify the general OpenInput behavior. At this point,
suffice to say that the window-parameter is fully filled (but with 
invalid id values), and that the provided flag tells OpenInput NOT to
use the window-parameter.

@example
    // Wait for an event
    oi_events_wait(&ev);
@end example

This is where all the action is. Here, we tell OpenInput to fill an
event into our previously declared @code{ev} variable, and that
OpenInput should not return until it has done so.

@example

    // Print something to the screen
    printf("Hello OpenInput event!\n");
@end example

This part simply prints a message to the console, so you can see that
OpenInput has received.

That's more or less all there is about the very first ``Hello
OpenInput'' program.

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Makefile include and library paths
@section Makefile include and library paths

This section is strictly speaking not a part of the samples itself,
but seeks to help you write a Makefile that does not use any hardcoded
paths for the usage of OpenInput.

OpenInput uses the @code{pkg-config} tool under UNIX systems, that
return metainformation about installed libraries. After you have run
@code{make install}, a file named @code{openinput.pc} will be copied
to the pkg-config data directory (usually under
@code{/usr/lib/pkgconfig} or @code{/usr/local/lib/pkgconfig}. You can
then use something like the following when settings up an include
path:

@example
CFLAGS = -Imydir/ `pkg-config --cflags openinput`
@end example

which will run the command @code{pkg-config --cflags openinput} and
append, which should be something like @code{-I/usr/include/openinput}
to the variable named @code{CFLAGS}.

Similarly, you probably want to setup both the library search path and
a list of the libraries to link too. This would look like this:

@example
LDPATH = `pkg-config --libs-only-L openinput`
LIBS = `pkg-config --libs-only-l openinput`
@end example

These will output something like @code{-L/usr/lib} and
@code{-lopeninput}, respectively.

Finally, in your Makefile target you can use these variables to
something like this

@example
all:
        gcc -o myprog $CFLAGS $LDPATH $LIBS myniceprog.c
@end example

That will tell gcc to use the OpenInput include path
@code{/usr/include/openinput}, to search for libraries at
@code{/usr/lib} and finally to link @code{openinput}.  In this way you
should end up with an executable named @code{myprog}, that has been
setup to dynamically link the OpenInput libraries.
